[
1
]
The reason the student protests of the 1960s didn't lead to
political correctness was precisely that â€” they were
student movements. They didn't have any real power. The
students may have been talking a lot about women's
liberation and black power, but it was not what they were
being taught in their classes. Not yet.
But in the early 1970s the student protestors of the 1960s
began to finish their dissertations and get hired as
professors. At first they were neither powerful nor
numerous. But as more of their peers joined them and the
previous generation of professors started to retire, they
gradually became both.
The reason political correctness began in the humanities and
social sciences was that these fields offered more scope for
the injection of politics. A 1960s radical who got a job as
a physics professor could still attend protests, but his
political beliefs wouldn't affect his work. Whereas research
in sociology and modern literature can be made as political
as you like.

[
2
]
I saw political correctness arise. When I started college in
1982 it was not yet a thing. Female students might object if
someone said something they considered sexist, but no one
was getting 
reported
 for it. It was still not a thing when
I started grad school in 1986. It was definitely a thing in
1988 though, and by the early 1990s it seemed to pervade
campus life.
What happened? How did protest become punishment? Why were
the late 1980s the point at which protests against male
chauvinism (as it used to be called) morphed into formal
complaints to university authorities about sexism?
Basically, the 1960s radicals got tenure. They became the
Establishment they'd protested against two decades before.
Now they were in a position not just to speak out about
their ideas, but to enforce them.
A new set of moral rules to enforce was exciting news to a
certain kind of student. What made it particularly exciting
was that they were allowed to attack professors. I remember
noticing that aspect of political correctness at the time.
It wasn't simply a grass-roots student movement. It was
faculty members encouraging students to attack other faculty
members. In that respect it was like the Cultural
Revolution. That wasn't a grass-roots movement either; that
was Mao unleashing the younger generation on his political
opponents. And in fact when Roderick MacFarquhar started
teaching a class on the Cultural Revolution at Harvard in
the late 1980s, many saw it as a comment on current events.
I don't know if it actually was, but people thought it was,
and that means the similarities were obvious.

[
3
]
College students larp. It's their nature. It's usually
harmless. But larping morality turned out to be a poisonous
combination. The result was a kind of moral etiquette,
superficial but very complicated. Imagine having to explain
to a well-meaning visitor from another planet why using the
phrase "people of color" is considered particularly
enlightened, but saying "colored people" gets you fired. And
why exactly one isn't supposed to use the word "negro" now,
even though Martin Luther King used it constantly in his
speeches. There are no underlying principles. You'd just
have to give him a long list of rules to memorize.

[
4
]